once around planet
Vulcan. And no, I don't mean this one,
but I do have a video all about 40
Eidani Spock's home world, at least in
fiction. So, you might want to check
that out. But let's start at the
beginning. And by that, I mean 1687 and
Sir Isaac Newton and his book Principia
Mathematica.
This was a fantastic
achievement and came from the fact that
Sir Edmund Hi, he of comet fame
persuaded Newton to actually publish all
of the writings that were cluttering up
Newton's desk in Trinity College,
Cambridge. In fact, Hi even paid for the
first edition of the book to be
published. It took three years for
Newton to write it all up, but it was an
absolute masterpiece. It solved the
problems of the orbits of the planets
and the moon and of course the behavior
of falling apples, everything all in one
amazing work of
mathematics. The photograph at the
bottom there is one I took in the Royal
Astronomical Society in London of one of
the very first
editions. So that was 1687. Well, 150 or
so years
later, this chap came along, Urbane
Leier, and he used Newton's laws to show
that if you calculated very very
accurately, you would be able to predict
that the inner planets might not be
stable in the very long term. Um, in
particular, Mars might wander off out of
its orbit. Now, we don't have to worry
about that anytime soon, but our
calculations do show that the orbits are
slightly chaotic over the billionyear
time scales that you might be interested
in as a mathematician.
But this story really goes to the fact
that Learier was looking at the orbit of
Mercury trying to find a solution to the
equations that gave the best possible
fit to its orbit, its mass, and the
interaction with all the other known
planets. And what he particularly noted
was that the orbit seemed to swing
around the sun. its long axis of its
elliptical path would change from orbit
to orbit by a fairly small amount. But
he was able to calculate and predict it
by allowing for the mass and the gravity
of the other planets in the main Venus
the nearest what neighbor Jupiter of
course because it's very large but you
had to take all of the planets into
account and the acid test was the
prediction of a transit of Mercury. Now,
this is a photograph of a transit of
Mercury showing the little tiny disc of
Mercury at the bottom right there moving
across the face of the sun against that
sort of boiling trickle of the uh orange
surface with a sunspot on it at the top
there and even a little prominence
flaring away out to the
side. So, you can clearly see uh Mercury
there. You can clearly tell that it's
not a sunspot. Well, he sent his
prediction over to the Cincinnati
Observatory, and this is a couple of
photographs I took when I had the
pleasure of visiting there a while ago.
At the time, it was the center of time
for the whole of the USA. And the
transit was going to be observable in
the daytime from USA. Obviously, you
can't observe transits at night because
you need the sun in the sky.
and he submitted his prediction for
exactly what time it was going to start.
Well, the observers tracked the event.
They noted the time that the planet
appeared and it was 16 seconds late.
Now, that doesn't sound like much, but
Lever's prediction was to the nearest
half second. So, this was an enormous
error. He thought he must have made a
mathematical mistake and pulled his
manuscript from publication because
actually there were other fish to fry.
He'd heard of another mathematical
problem. And this all goes back to the
discovery years earlier of the planet
Uranus by Sir William Hershel with his
telescope shown here. He thought he'd
found a comet, but this newly discovered
moving object that showed a disc turned
out to be a new planet. Now, Hershel
wanted to be royal astronomer. So, he
tried to name the planet after King
George, George Cidius, which sounds like
something out of Star Wars to our modern
ears, doesn't it? But, uh, anyway, that
wasn't accepted. No one was going to let
a planet be named after an English king.
And the name Uranus for the father of
Saturn was uh produced because the orbit
was certainly out beyond Saturn. But its
orbit seemed to drift off course over
the years. The longer you're observing
Ark, the time that you've been tracking
the planet, the worse the prediction
became. Just didn't seem to fit. And it
just seemed inconceivable that Sir Isaac
Newton and his laws of motion were
wrong. So something must be missing. And
both Learier in Paris and John Coo
Jadams in Cambridge read about this
problem and decided to attack it. They
made the assumption that there was
another unknown planet out beyond Uranus
that we hadn't found yet, trying to pull
the slightly inner planet off course.
If Uranus had overtaken this outer
planet, it would have been accelerated
by it while it was catching up and then
decelerated again after it had gone
past. And that might allow the location
of the planet to be revealed. So they
both tried to back calculate
it. Very difficult given that they were
doing all these calculations by hand.
Now, Adams sent his predictions to
Grenidge to the royal astronomer Ary who
didn't listen to him until Adams
pestered him, actually had to go and
visit him rather than just send him a
letter to persuade him to do something.
And eventually he sent the predictions
up to the director of the Cambridge
Observatory, Chalice,
um, and asked if Chalice could organize
a search. And the search was conducted
using the telescope that you see in the
photograph there with the old picture of
its original dome, but the more modern
photograph under a new dome that it now
has there. This is the North Sumberland
Refrator. It's a 12-in lensbased
telescope built in 1838 and uh was one
of the most powerful telescopes in the
world. But unfortunately, Chalice
bungled it. He didn't have a map of the
area, a proper star map. And so he set
out between him and his students to map
a very large area of the sky. He didn't
trust the predictions at all. And uh so
they mapped the same area of the sky and
pinned to my wall here, I have got a
copy of the log. And on the log, it
marks in three separate places a small
blue star that they say had moved from
one observation to the
next. You were looking for a planet and
you really only had one job, guys.
Anyway, we're not bitter and twisted
about it at all.
But meanwhile, Lever made his
calculations and sent the prediction to
Gala, a German observer in Berlin, who
had a map and went out. And the very
first night they went out, they could
see that there was a a small blue object
on the starfield that was not on the
map. And so they were confident that
they had in fact discovered the new
planet. Now, here's the uh map of the
area in the constellation of Aquarius
with Adam's prediction up to the top
left. Levier's prediction over to the
top right there along that dotted line
which what they assumed would be where
to look because that's the plane
essentially the common plane of the
orbit of the planets. They all stick
fairly closely to that as they go around
the sun. and then marked with a circle
with a cross it says Neptune's
discovery. just a little way away from
the uh predicted line and between the
two observations, perhaps a little
nearer to Levari's than uh Adams is, but
when you bear in mind that's only um
just about a degree or two uh in error
out of the whole sky, it's pretty
good. And this was seen as a triumph not
only for Newtonian mechanics, but for
Leier himself. Um although uh the
British tended to uh argue about the
fact that uh we'd seen it first and a
lot of the textbooks for years
afterwards put Adams as the discoverer
which was really just not fair. Um
there's a very nice picture there taken
by Voyager 2 of Neptune as it's now
known uh as it flew past. A little side
story is that Leverier was um wanting to
name it after himself, planet Lever. But
again, no one was having that. And so a
wide discussion was held until somebody
suggested Neptune. I think in fact
Neptune had been suggested as a possible
name for Uranus beforehand Uranus was
brought up. So it was kind of available.
But anyway,
Learier took this success as a huge
inspiration and returned to the problem
of Mercury. And I'll just give you a few
more details of that because the long
axis of Mercury's advance around the
sun swings by an amount which is
565 arc seconds per 100 years. So in a
century it changes by nearly 600
seconds which uh would be 10 minutes of
arc or about a third of the diameter of
the moon on the sky. So it's a quite a
small event event. If you wanted to see
the position drift by the size of the
moon on the sky, you'd have to wait 300
years.
And Larier was able to calculate and
indeed we can do the calculations as
well that the gravitational effect
causing this of the other planets could
be accounted for as follows. Venus the
nearest planet to Mercury gave the
greatest deflection which accounted for
280.6. Jupiter
152.6 cuz it's a massive planet even
though it's further away. the Earth
about the same mass as Venus but a bit
further away
83.6. And if you then went on and added
up all the rest of the effects of all
the known planets, including now
Neptune, of course, very tiny effect.
Uh, and the very thought maybe that
would solve this problem when he first
attacked it, but it didn't because you
add all of them up and you get
522 and there is an error of 43 in the
calculation that uh, Levier just could
not get rid
of. So he came up with the idea that
perhaps there was yet another planet
responsible for this. Now this planet
would have to be such that it was
affecting the orbit of Mercury and not
the really having much effect on the
rest of the planets. And so the obvious
place for this to be was interior
between Mercury and the sun. the other
planets would see this as a very very uh
close approximation of just a tiniest uh
change in the overall mass of the sun.
And Leier assumed that Vulcan as he
called it was very hot, very close to
the sun, half the mass of Mercury and
half the distance. This seemed plausible
based on some of the things that uh we
had uh inferred from the structure of
the rest of the solar system where the
distances had a doubling law called
Bod's law associated. So this was a a
guess, but based on the guess, Narier
published a prediction in September of
1859 of this smaller interior
planet. And then it just 3 months later
in December of 1859, he got a letter
from Dr. Edmund Leco. Leco was a
country general practitioner, a medical
doctor and uh in his spare time an
amateur astronomer and he built a small
observatory on the side of his premises
and whenever he got the chance he would
go out and do observing between
patients. I'm not quite sure how he ever
had the time really but there you go. Um
well what he wrote to Leverier was that
he had seen a transit across the face of
the sun of Lever's planet in March on
March the 26th of
1859. And so Learier went down to see
him and interviewed him at length,
checked all his observations and
equipment, made sure he knew what he was
talking about. Um and from this
observation and his
assumptions ass published an assumed
orbit of 20
days going around the sun many times in
a year and that would actually tend to
give quite a lot of transits. Transits
of Mercury are quite rare. They're only
about every 33 years for one of the
series of transits. I think uh I've seen
two in my life um when the planet's gone
in front of the sun, but Vulcan whizzing
around much more rapidly would do so
more
often. But instead of waiting for a
transit, what you could do is try to
catch
Vulcan visible during a total solar
eclipse when the moon goes in front of
the sun and blocks out the
um disk of the sun. Somewhere around
about within a sort of 8ree arc of the
sun, you should be able to see Vulcan.
You can certainly see Mercury and Venus
at these times. And Vulcan, even if it
was smaller, it would be bright because
it would be brightly lit by the very
close distance to the sun. So maybe this
was a good way of chasing it down.
And lots of people tried this, including
this guy, James Watson, who organized an
eclipse
chasing expedition out into the wilds of
Wyoming in 1869. And then again in
1878 because the 1869 event was beaten
by the weather. But in 1878, Watson saw
a star-like object near the sun that was
not on his chart. So he announced he had
located
Vulcan. But this time the position
suggested an orbit of 38 days, roughly
double that that Levier had found.
Rather
unusual. Lots of people did this. Lots
of people made predictions and over the
next 30 years absolutely nothing was
found. Levier passed away in 1877
completely convinced to the end that he
had discovered a new planet twice,
Neptune of course and
Vulcan. And this problem persisted of
nobody able to find this missing planet
right through until the
year
1915 when Einstein entered the fray.
What Einstein did was calculate his
general theory of
relativity, explaining how gravity
really works, which is that space tells
matter how to move and matter tells
space how to bend and it is that
curvature of space which is responsible
for gravity.
Now, he wrote a letter about how this
might be observed predicting that a ray
of light passing a massive object would
be deflected by a calculable amount. And
the letter is shown here. It's in
German. It says uh uh greetings dear
colleagues. and then goes on to talk
about the deviation caused by the
gravitational field of a light beam
passing by the sun and comes out with a
number 0.84 arcsec there. Um talking
about uh how the position of uh the star
might be shifted based on the distance
away from the sun and so forth.
So this led to another eclipse
chase. In May of
1919, there was an eclipse on the 29th
visible from uh the southern hemisphere.
And so Sir Arthur Edington from
Cambridge organized an expedition to go
and observe the eclipse and photograph
it and take the photographs away and
compare the positions of the stars on
the photos with where they were in that
stain field of the sky at night with the
sun well out of the way. So before and
after the gravitational influence. And
the image at the top there, the snapshot
from a BBC video shows an overlay in the
negative. So the stars are appearing as
black dots of how they have doubled up
and been shifted between the two images
with and without the sun present. And
this uh predicted shift in this case of
1.8 eight arc seconds was uh
exactly aligned with Einstein's
predictions and as a rarity in those
days this made world headlines all over
lights are skew in the heavens men of
science more or less a go over the
results of eclipse observation Einstein
theory
triumphs stars were not where they
seemed or were calculated to be and I
love the last
But nobody need worry. They wouldn't say
that these days, would
they? So Einstein returned to
recalculate the orbit of Mercury. And in
fact, in his first public presentation
over a series of four lectures at the
university,
he presented his formula for general
relativity and his derivation. and right
at the end presented a new calculation
using them of Mercury's orbit and the
difference between Newtonian physics
where gravity travels
instantaneously and Einsteinian general
relativity where gravity has its
influence at the speed of
light
proved critical in being able to put an
end to planet Vulcan.
because general relativity could account
for exactly 43 arcseconds of extra
rotation that uh Newtonian physics could
not
predict. He was even able to go on and
show that it should affect the other
planets slightly. Venus would get a
little shift of just 8.6 arcsec per
century, Earth 3.8, and even the
asteroid Icarus 10.8. And these are in
astonishingly good agreements with
observed numbers. So uh he really uh was
able to say that Learier might have
found a planet using pen and
paper Neptune but that he Einstein had
destroyed one. Uh quite an interesting
way of looking at it but it begs the
question which I don't think anyone's
ever answered. So what was it that Les
Gabau saw? Just what did he record that
26th of March
1859 transiting across the sun between
uh the hours of 4:00 and quart 5 French
time? Could it have been an asteroid?
The only asteroids capable of transiting
near sun's disc from our point of view
on Earth are the
ATNs, a group of asteroids that um orbit
just closer between us and the sun. But
as far as we know, they're all too small
to have been visible as a black
dot. For example, in 1990,
uh TG1 was discovered, a small asteroid.
And in 2005 on the 14th of April, it
crossed the disc of the sun and was only
0.05
arcseconds in diameter. At least a
factor of a 100, too small for Leco to
have seen it. So the truth of this is we
just don't know. Was it a sunspot? Was
it an asteroid that we don't know about
that doesn't Maybe it's had its orbit
deflected since. Who knows? Maybe it was
one of those interstellar visitors like
Omua Mua that hurtled through the solar
system, flew past between the Earth and
the Sun and disappeared forever. Um,
well, we just don't know. If you want to
read more about this, there is an
absolutely excellent book by Thomas Leon
called The Hunt for Planet Vulcan. And
it's a thoroughly good read. Talks a lot
about the characters involved and all of
the shenanigans that went on between uh
Ary Adams, Chalice, uh Leier, Leabau,
and so forth. So, I really do recommend
that as a good read.
Anyway, thanks very much for listening
and I'll see you at the next one.